
Abstract
Background: Seeking online health information can empower individuals to better understand their health concerns, facilitating
their ability to manage their health conditions more effectively. It has the potential to change the likelihood and frequency of
health service usage. Although existing literature has demonstrated the prevalence of seeking online health information among
different populations, the factors affecting online health information perception and discussions on the associations between
seeking online health information and health service utilization are limited.
Objective: We analyzed the associations between online health information seeking behavior and health service utilization, as
well as the online health information perception delivery mechanism.
Methods: We analyzed data from the Chinese General Social Survey, the first national representative survey conducted in
mainland China. The independent variable was the online health information seeking behavior. The outcome variable was health
service utilization by the respondents, and online health information perception was selected as the mediating variable in this
analysis. Factor analysis was conducted to obtain online health information perception. Multiple regressions were performed to
investigate the effect of online health information seeking behavior on physician visits. Bootstrap methods were conducted to
test the mediation effects of online health information perception.
Results: This analysis included 1475 cases. Among the participants, 939 (63.66%) sought online health information in the last
12 months. The mean age of the respondents was 46.72 (SD 15.86) years, and 794 (53.83%) were females. After controlling for
other variables, individuals with online health information seeking behaviors showed 0.289 times more outpatient visits (P=.003),
0.131 times more traditional Chinese medicine outpatient visits (P=.01), and 0.158 times more Western medicine outpatient visits
(P=.007) over the past year compared to those who did not seek health information online. Additionally, multiple regression
analyses revealed statistically significant effects of gender, age, and health status on physician visits. The total effect revealed
that seeking online health information significantly influenced the total physician visits (β=0.290; P=.003), indicating a certain
correlation between online health information seeking behavior and physician visits. Seeking online health information had a
significant positive impact on the perception (β=0.265; P<.001). The mediation effects analysis identified that online health
information perception led to a significant increase in physician visits with the increase in the online health information seeking
behaviors (β=0.232; P=.02).
Conclusions: The online health information perception of an individual influences the effect online health information seeking
has on the frequency of physician visits. The online health information seeking behavior impacts outpatient service utilization
both directly and indirectly through online health information perception and significantly increases the frequency of clinic visits
